This lecture is about the basics of
Experimental design.
You'll see a lot more about this
topic in other courses like Inference and
Prediction.
But I thought I'd just give you a little
bit of the basics, so you can get started.
So why should you care about experimental
design?
I'm going to use an example to illustrate
why you should.
This is an example that actually comes
from my area of research.
This is an area where they have used ge-,
genomic information, so information
about your genomes to predict what kind of
chemotherapy you might respond to best.
This was an incredibly exciting result,
because it would open
the door for all sorts of personalized
medicine within cancer therapeutics.
Unfortunately, they actually performed a
very flawed study design, and a
very flawed statistical analysis, which
was pointed out later in this paper.
Even more unfortunately, the studied had
already been on going
for a long time, and they'd actually
started clinical trials.
But they were using those predictions that
they'd developed in
the earlier study to decide what
chemo-therapies people should get.
This was causing all sorts of problems for
people because they had performed a poor
analysis.
So this ultimately led to a lawsuit from
the people that were
enrolled in the clinical trial against the
original investigators who developed the
predictive model, this illustrates how a
very exciting result can lead you
astray if you are not very careful about
experimental design and analysis.
The first thing to be aware of when
performing any sort of an
experimental design or data science
project
is to care about the analysis plan.
This is actually a publishes paper where,
believe it
or not, in the abstract of the published
paper, it
says insert statistical method here
because the person who was
writing the paper didn't know what the
statistical method was.
It's critically important that you pay
attention to
all aspects of the design and analysis of
the
study so that everything from the data
cleaning
to the data analysis to the reporting so
that
you don't end up, first of all in
silly, embarrassing situations like this,
but more importantly so
that you're aware of what are the key
issues
in the study design that can trip you up.
Regardless of what study you are doing,
you need to plan
for data and code sharing, you all now
have GitHub accounts
that you have developed either through
this course or previously to
the course, so that is a good place to
share your code.
If you want to share your data with very
small amounts, you can share it on the
GitHub.
Larger amounts might go on a site like
FigShare, where you can
share your scientific data, and also other
kinds of data with other people.
But you might also need a larger data
sharing plan, if your data
are much more unwieldy, or large and can't
be shared on the websites.
If you don't have a data sharing plan, can
I recommend mine?
The leek group has developed a guide to
data
sharing that you can find at this website
here, that
outlines all the steps that are involved
in taking a
broad data set and making it available to
other people.
So
the first thing that you need to do when
you're
actually performing an experiment is
formulate your question in advance.
So the key component of data science, if
we were going to define it
for the purposes of this course track,
is that it's actually a scientific
discipline.
And a scientific discipline requires that
you're answering a specific
question when you're using data, so here's
one example of that.
This is actually a study that was
performed by Barack
Obama when he was running for re-election
for United States Presidency.
What they did was they compared two
versions of a website, whether they were
going to change the text on the website
and see if it would improve donations.
So the experiment was to randomly show
visitors one version or the other
of the website, measure how much they
donate, and then determine which is
better.
This brings us to the key idea of a
large component of data science, which is
statistical inference.
They wouldn't want to show the website to
every single
person, because it would be expensive to
run that experiment.
So the population of people is all
possible donors in the United States.
All possible people that might go to
Barack Obama's website to donate.
They might select some small subset of
those with a probability argument
to decide to show them one version or the
other of the website.
This would result in a sample, a much
smaller number of people that had
observed the data, or had observed the
websites and decided whether to donate or
not.
They would then calculate descriptive
statistics, say the total number of
donations that they got over a certain
number of visits, or
the average number of donations, amount of
donations, they got over
a certain number of visits, and then they
would use inferential statistics.
To try to decide if the statistics that
they
calculated on this small sample would play
out in the
same way if they applied it to the large
population of all people that might come
to the website.
So in here is one scenario, suppose that
the
data work that they collected
hypothetically turned out this
way, there were two versions of the
website, there
was the donate version and there was the
sign-up version.
And so what they could do is they could
say for every
1000 visitors, what was the total number
of dollars that were donated?
So if they did that over a, or the average
number of dollars donated.
So for a 1000 visits you might get about
$6,000 on average over a course of a week.
And so, suppose you ran that experiment
three different times.
You might get observations of very
different amounts of dollars that you
would
observe for the donate case, and for the
sign-up version of the website.
So what you see here is that the average
number of donations may
be more or less the same, or it may be
slightly different, but
it's very hard to tell, because at each of
the different experiments, you
get a highly variable answer, under both
of the different versions of the website.
Here's another hypothetical case.
Suppose in this case, you got a very
slightly smaller number of dollars donated
under when you showed the sign up version
than you did the donate version.
Here, the variability is much smaller, so
you can tell
for sure that the donate version gives you
more money.
You might implement the donate version,
but it's not
sort of the that would be a huge benefit.
The much bigger benefit comes when you run
the same experiment, and a domain version
has
small variability, and the sign up version
small variability in the total number of
dollars donated.
But there's a large difference between the
amount people donated when they saw
the donate sign, and the amount they
donated when they saw the sign outside.
So this overwhelms the variability that
they saw in
the experiment and so it is very
interesting for them,
and would suggest they should only show
the donate
version of the website to people that came
to visit.
Another important issue is the issue of
confounding.
So suppose in a particular study that you
measured both shoe size and
literacy and suppose that you were looking
for correlations between shoe size and
literacy.
You might actually observe quite a few of
these correlations,
because people with small shoes tend to
have less literacy.
But what you might be missing is that
age is actually the variable that's
causing this relationship.
When you're very young, say a baby, you
have a
very small shoe size, you also have a very
small literacy.
As you get older, you get a larger shoe
size
and a larger literacy so that the variable
age is actually
a confounder for the relationship between
shoe size and literacy,
which might be very, very small once you
account for age.
So if you only measure shoe size and
literacy, you might
be led astray if you observe the
correlation between these two
variables this is what is called
confounding, so it's paying attention
to what are the other variables that might
be causing a relationship.
This plays out all the time in lots of
different studies, so here's one example.
This is actually from a possibly serious
paper in
The New England Journal of Medicine, where
they plotted
chocolate consumption in kilograms per
year per capita versus
the Nobel laureates per ten million in the
population.
And they observed that there's a
relationship between these two variables.
So what could be going on here?
There's lots of reasons why you might
consume
more chocolate and have more Nobel Prize
winners.
For example, your country might have
better education system if they
have more money and so they would have
more Nobel Laureates.
And if they have more money per capita,
they
would also probably consume more choclat,
chocolate per capita.
And so there's one reason, not many
reasons why
though, this observed correlation may not
be an actual relationship.
That is due to a scientific relationship
between chocolate consumption and Nobel
Laureates per capita.
This is sometimes called Spurious
correlation and it's also
why you often here the phrase correlation
is not causation.
Even if you observe that two variables are
correlated with each other, you have to
prove to yourself that they're not
correlated
because of some other variables we didn't
measure.
So there are some ways that you can deal
with potential confounders.
So one way is you can fix var, fix a bunch
of variables for example, in the
case where you're considering websites for
Obama, 20 2012,
you can fix Obama 2012 on all the
websites.
That should be a two there and then, that
way, that
variable doesn't change no matter what the
text is that you're showing.
People see you fix that variable so it
can't be a con factor.
Another way is, that you can stratify.
So suppose you have two website colors,
and you want to try out both of
those website colors with both phrases,
and
you want to know which phrase works
better.
Then what you can do is use both phrases
equally on both colors.
That way, you've stratified your sample so
you
have both website colors used equally with
both phrases.
If you can't do any of the, either of the
other two things, if you
can't fix a variable or stratify it, then
what you can do is randomize it.
And so what we mean by randomization is
that you need to be able to
use a computer program, or flip a coin in
order randomly assign people to groups.
Why does this help?
So, suppose that there's a particular
study that we're preforming, and
suppose that there are ten experimental
units that look like this.
So suppose there's a confounding variable,
and lighter values of that confounding
variable correspond, lower values of that
confounding variable correspond to lighter
colors.
And higher value of course, compounding
variable correspond to the
darker colors, so you have these
experimental units, and suppose
they are ordered by values in the
compounding variable, and
suppose we are silly enough to apply one
treatment applied it.
All of the var, all of the people that
have a high value of the confounding
variable, and another treatment to all the
people
that have a low value of the confounding
variable.
Then it would be impossible to distinguish
whether
any difference we saw was due to
differences
in treatment, or due to differences in the
confounding variable, but if we randomly
assign the treatment.
Then some of the people that get the green
treatment will have
low value of the confounding variable and
some will have high values.
And so since that'll be balanced, we'll
be able to determine whether the
difference will
be to determine that the difference in
treatment
is what we're actually observing in the
outcome.
So for a prediction study, you actually
have slightly
different issues that come up from the
inferential case.
So again, you might have a population of
individuals, and you might not be able
to collect the data on all those
individuals but you want to predict
something about them.
So for example, we might get individuals
that
come in and we measure something about
their genome,
and we want to predict whether they should
get
whether they're going to respond to
chemotherapy or not.
So what we do is, we collect these
individuals and we might collect
observations from people that did respond
to
chemotherapy, and did not respond to
chemoptherapy.
And then what we want to do is build a
predictive
function so that if we get a new
individual, we can
predict whether they're going to respond
to chemotherapy up here, as
an orange person, or not respond down here
as a green person.
So the idea here is that we'll still need
to deal with probability and sampling and
potential compounding variables, because,
when we're building this
prediction function, we want it to be
highly accurate.
Another issue that comes up is that,
prediction is slightly more challenging
than inference.
So for example, if you look at these two
populations, the, the population for the
light grey curve has
a mean, value about here, and the
population for
the dark grey curve has a mean value about
here.
If you look at the distribution of
observations from these two populations,
and so what
you can see is, there's a difference in
the P value of these two populations.
But if I tell you, for example, that
I've observed the value that comes, say,
right here.
It's very difficult to know which of these
two populations it came
from, because it's relatively likely that
it came from the light gray population.
But it's also relatively likely that it
came from the
dark gray population, so it's very
difficult to tell the difference.
For prediction, you actually need the
distributions to
be a little bit more separated, so these
also,
these two distributions also have a
different mean, but
now, they're far enough apart based on
their variability.
That if I give you an observation that
lands right about
here, you know it probably came from the
dark grid population.
Where if I give you an observation here,
it probably came from a light grid
population.
So it's important to pay attention to the
relative size of effects when considering
prediction versus inference.
For prediction there's several key qual,
quantities that we need to be aware of.
So the first set of key quantities is,
positive and negative statuses
so, for example, this is comes from a test
a medical testing scenario.
So you can have, suppose you can either
have a disease or not have a disease.
So plus means you have the disease, and
minus means you don't have the
disease, and you have a test to determine
whether you have that disease or not.
And the plus means you do, the test was
positive, and a negative means the test
was negative.
So, if you have the disease, and you test
positive, then you're a true positive.
If you do not have the disease, and you
test positive, that's a false positive.
If you do not if you have the disease, but
don't test positive, that's a false
negative, and if you don't have the
disease,
and you test negative, that's a true
negative.
Some quantities that you need to pay
attention to are the
probability you have a positive test,
given you have disease that sensitivity.
The probability you have a negative test,
given you have no disease that
specificity.
The probability you have disease, given
you have a positive test.
This is probably what you care about if
you come in to
the clinics, so I tell you that you have a
positive test.
Then you want to know, what's the
probability you have disease.
Similarly, I tell you if you have a
negative test, you might
know, you might want to know what's the
probability that you have disease.
Accuracy is just the probability that you
are correct in
the outcome, regardless of whether you are
positive or negative.
Another key component of paying attention
to big data
and data science is data being aware of
data dredging.
So suppose you want to consider something
silly, like jelly beans cause acne.
This comes from an XKCD cartoon.
So, scientists could investigate, and they
find out that jelly
beans aren't related to causing accuracy
or sorry, causing acne.
So then what they say well that settles
that, but you could try to change your
hypothesis.
You could say oh, well, actually it's just
purple jelly beans that cause acne.
No, it's brown jelly beans that cause
acne.
No, it's pink jelly beans, and you keep
going and going and going until you found
a
result that you liked and you'd come up
with
good news, green jelly beans are linked to
acne.
But this of course ignores the fact that
you
can try a whole bunch of different things
first.
So one thing you have to pay attention to
when dealing with big data,
or any data science problem, is being
aware of the problem of data dredging.
So in summary, good experiments have
replication so that you can measure
variability.
They'd measure that variability, and
compare it to the signal that they
were looking for, and they'd generalize to
the problem that you care about.
Also important, good experiments are
transparent
in both their code and their data.
Prediction is not inference, and both can
be
important but it depends on what your
application is.
Also, in any data science pro, problem,
you need to be aware of data dredging.
The other important issues with
experimental
design, will be covered in later classes.